[CUBRIDMAN-255] manual for query rewriting optimization (#561)
CUBRID/cubrid-manual: en/sql/tuning.rst

**UPDATE STATISTICS** statement is recommended to be executed periodically. It is also recommended to execute when a new index is added or when a mass of **INSERT** or **DELETE** statements make the big difference between the statistics and the actual information.

> When updating statistics, the execution plan cache of the related statistics is not deleted. the execution plan is regenerated when the following two criteria are met during query execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When updating statistics, the execution plan cache related to those statistics is not deleted. The execution plan is regenerated when the following two criteria are met during query execution.
```

>     #. 6 minutes after creating the execution plan cache

Author: ```suggestion
    #. 6 minutes after the execution plan cache creation or regeneration check
```

>     #. 6 minutes after the execution plan cache creation or regeneration check

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    #. 6 minutes have passed since the execution plan cache creation or regeneration check
```

>     #. the page size increases or decreases by more than 10 times. and statistics are updated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    #. The page size increases or decreases by more than 10 times, and statistics are updated
```

.. code-block:: sql

    CREATE TABLE t1 (code INT, name VARCHAR(20));
    INSERT INTO t1 VALUES(1,'Park'),(2,'Park'),(3,'Joo'),(4,'Joo'),(5,'Song');
    CREATE INDEX i_t1_code ON t1(code,name);
    UPDATE STATISTICS ON t1;
    ;info stats t1

::

    CLASS STATISTICS
    ****************
     Class name: t1 Timestamp: Thu Dec 19 15:15:10 2024
     Total pages in class heap: 1
     Total objects: 5
     Number of attributes: 2
     Attribute: code (integer)
        Number of Distinct Values: 5
        B+tree statistics:
            BTID: { 0 , 5760 }
            Cardinality: 5 (5,5) , Total pages: 3 , Leaf pages: 1 , Height: 2
     
     Attribute: name (character varying)
        Number of Distinct Values: 3

*   *Timestamp*: The time when the statistics were updated.
*   *Total pages*: The number of pages in the table.
*   *Total objects*: The total number of rows in the table.

> *   *Number of Distinct Values*: The number of values with duplicates removed. column **code**  is all different values, so NDV is  5. If type of the column is **LOB** or **VARCHAR** exceeding 4,000, NDV is not generated. NDV is used to calculate **SELECTIVITY** in the optimizer. For more information, see :ref:`optimizer-principle`\.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*   *Number of Distinct Values*: The number of values with duplicates removed. column **code** is all different values, so NDV is 5. If type of the column is **LOB** or **VARCHAR** exceeding 4,000, NDV is not generated. NDV is used to calculate **SELECTIVITY** in the optimizer. For more information, see :ref:`optimizer-principle`\.
```

*   B+tree statistics: Index statistics

>     *   *B+tree Cardinality*: The number of values from which the accumulated duplicates of the index key values have been removed. In the example above, **(5,5)**/ matches the index column **(code,name)**/. The first **5**/ is the number of values from which the duplicates of the **code** column have been removed, and the second **5**/ is the number of values from which the duplicates of the two columns **code,name** have been removed.

Author: ```suggestion
    *   *B+tree Cardinality*: The number of values from which the accumulated duplicates of the index key values have been removed. In the example above, **(5,5)**\ matches the index column **(code,name)**\. The first **5**\ is the number of values from which the duplicates of the **code** column have been removed, and the second **5**\ is the number of values from which the duplicates of the two columns **code,name** have been removed.
```

> *   B+tree statistics: Index statistics
>     *   *B+tree Cardinality*: The number of values from which the accumulated duplicates of the index key values have been removed. In the example above, **(5,5)**\ matches the index column **(code,name)**\. The first **5**\ is the number of values from which the duplicates of the **code** column have been removed, and the second **5**\ is the number of values from which the duplicates of the two columns **code,name** have been removed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*   B+tree statistics: Index statistics

    *   *B+tree Cardinality*: The number of values from which the accumulated duplicates of the index key values have been removed. In the example above, **(5,5)** matches the index column **(code,name)**. The first **5** is the number of values from which the duplicates of the **code** column have been removed, and the second **5** is the number of values from which the duplicates of the two columns **code,name** have been removed.
```

.. code-block:: sql

    CREATE TABLE t1 (code INT, name VARCHAR(20));
    INSERT INTO t1 VALUES(1,'Park'),(2,'Park'),(3,'Joo'),(4,'Joo'),(5,'Song');
    CREATE INDEX i_t1_code ON t1(code,name);
    UPDATE STATISTICS ON t1;
    ;info stats t1

::

    CLASS STATISTICS
    ****************
     Class name: t1 Timestamp: Thu Dec 19 15:15:10 2024
     Total pages in class heap: 1
     Total objects: 5
     Number of attributes: 2
     Attribute: code (integer)
        Number of Distinct Values: 5
        B+tree statistics:
            BTID: { 0 , 5760 }
            Cardinality: 5 (5,5) , Total pages: 3 , Leaf pages: 1 , Height: 2
     
     Attribute: name (character varying)
        Number of Distinct Values: 3

*   *Timestamp*: The time when the statistics were updated.
*   *Total pages*: The number of pages in the table.
*   *Total objects*: The total number of rows in the table.

> *   *Number of Distinct Values*: The number of values with duplicates removed. column **code** is all different values, so NDV is 5. If type of the column is **LOB** or **VARCHAR** exceeding 4,000, NDV is not generated. NDV is used to calculate **SELECTIVITY** in the optimizer. For more information, see :ref:`optimizer-principle`\.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   *Number of Distinct Values*: The number of values, with duplicates removed. The column **code** consists of all different values, so the NDV is 5. If type of the column is **LOB** or **VARCHAR** exceeding 4,000 characters, NDV is not generated. NDV is used to calculate **SELECTIVITY** in the optimizer. For more information, see :ref:`optimizer-principle`\.
```

    SELECT /*+ RECOMPILE ORDERED */  DISTINCT h.host_year, o.host_nation
    FROM history h INNER JOIN olympic o ON h.host_year = o.host_year;

You can specify the table order by specifying the **LEADING** hint. Unlike the **ORDERED** hint, it can be specified regardless of the order in which the tables are written.

.. code-block:: sql

    SELECT /*+ RECOMPILE LEADING(o,h) */  DISTINCT h.host_year, o.host_nation
    FROM history h INNER JOIN olympic o ON h.host_year = o.host_year;

.. _optimizer-principle:

Optimizer Principle
=====================

> **CUBRID**/'s optimizer performs cost-based optimization when generating a query execution plan, and calculates **selectivity**/ and **expected number of rows and pages**/ through statistics. Based on this, it calculates the cost and selects the execution plan with the lowest cost.

Author: ```suggestion
**CUBRID**\'s optimizer performs cost-based optimization when generating a query execution plan, and calculates **selectivity**\ and **expected number of rows and pages**\ through statistics. Based on this, it calculates the cost and selects the execution plan with the lowest cost.
```

> **CUBRID**\'s optimizer performs cost-based optimization when generating a query execution plan, and calculates **selectivity**\ and **expected number of rows and pages**\ through statistics. Based on this, it calculates the cost and selects the execution plan with the lowest cost.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**CUBRID**\'s optimizer performs cost-based optimization when generating a query execution plan, and calculates **selectivity** and **expected number of rows and pages** through statistics. Based on this, it calculates the cost and selects the execution plan with the lowest cost.
```

Selectivity
--------------

> **Selectivity**/ is the ratio of data to be selected when a specific predicate is evaluated. The optimizer calculates the selectivity for each predicate in the **WHERE** clause. **CUBRID**/ assumes that the entire data is evenly distributed and calculates the **selectivity**/ using the **Number of Distinct Value**/ of statistics.

Author: ```suggestion
**Selectivity**\ is the ratio of data to be selected when a specific predicate is evaluated. The optimizer calculates the selectivity for each predicate in the **WHERE** clause. **CUBRID**\ assumes that the entire data is evenly distributed and calculates the **selectivity**\ using the **Number of Distinct Value**\ of statistics.
```

> **Selectivity**\ is the ratio of data to be selected when a specific predicate is evaluated. The optimizer calculates the selectivity for each predicate in the **WHERE** clause. **CUBRID**\ assumes that the entire data is evenly distributed and calculates the **selectivity**\ using the **Number of Distinct Value**\ of statistics.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Selectivity** is the ratio of data to be selected when a specific predicate is evaluated. The optimizer calculates the selectivity for each predicate in the **WHERE** clause. **CUBRID** assumes that the entire data is evenly distributed and calculates the **selectivity** using the **Number of Distinct Value** of statistics.
```

::

    SELECTIVITY = 1 / Number of Distinct Value

.. code-block:: sql

    CREATE TABLE t1 (code INT, name VARCHAR(20));
    INSERT INTO t1 VALUES(1,'Park'),(2,'Park'),(3,'Park'),(4,'joo'),(5,'joo'),(5,'joo');
    CREATE INDEX i_t1_code ON t1(code,name);
    UPDATE STATISTICS ON t1;
     
    ;info stats t1

::

    CLASS STATISTICS
    ****************
     Class name: t1 Timestamp: Fri Dec 20 13:07:58 2024
     Total pages in class heap: 1
     Total objects: 6
     Number of attributes: 2
     Attribute: code (integer)
        Number of Distinct Values: 5
        B+tree statistics:
            BTID: { 0 , 5760 }
            Cardinality: 5 (5,5) , Total pages: 3 , Leaf pages: 1 , Height: 2
     
     Attribute: name (character varying)
        Number of Distinct Values: 2

.. code-block:: sql

    ;plan detail
    SELECT /*+ recompile */ * FROM t1 WHERE code = 3 AND name IN ('Song', 'Ham');

::

    Join graph terms:
    term[0]: [dba.t1].code=3 (sel 0.2)
    term[1]: [dba.t1].[name] range ('Ham' =  or 'Song' = ) (sel 0.75)

> **term[0]: [dba.t1].code=3**/ The **Number of Distinct Values**/ of **code**/ in the statistics is 5, so the selectivity is 1/5 or 0.2.

Author: ```suggestion
**term[0]: [dba.t1].code=3**\ The **Number of Distinct Values**\ of **code**\ in the statistics is 5, so the selectivity is 1/5 or 0.2.
```

> **term[0]: [dba.t1].code=3**\ The **Number of Distinct Values**\ of **code**\ in the statistics is 5, so the selectivity is 1/5 or 0.2.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**term[0]: [dba.t1].code=3** The **Number of Distinct Values** of **code** in the statistics is 5, so the selectivity is 1/5 or 0.2.
```

> **term[0]: [dba.t1].code=3**\ The **Number of Distinct Values**\ of **code**\ in the statistics is 5, so the selectivity is 1/5 or 0.2.
> **term[1]: [dba.t1].[name] range ('Ham' = or 'Song' = )** performs an **OR** operation on two values of name. Since the **Number of Distinct Values** for **name** is 2, the selectivity for each value is 1/2. Adding the two values and subtracting the intersection gives the calculation **0.5 + 0.5 - (0.5 x 0.5)**, resulting in 0.75.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**term[0]: [dba.t1].code=3** The **Number of Distinct Values** of **code** in the statistics is 5, so the selectivity is 1/5 or 0.2.
**term[1]: [dba.t1].[name] range ('Ham' = or 'Song' = )** performs an **OR** operation on two values of name. Since the **Number of Distinct Values** for **name** is 2, the selectivity for each value is 1/2. Adding the two values and subtracting the intersection gives the calculation **0.5 + 0.5 - (0.5 x 0.5)**, resulting in 0.75.
```

Expected number of rows
-----------------------------

The **expected number of rows**  is calculated by multiplying the **selectivity** by the **total number of data rows**.

::

    Number of expected rows = total rows of a table * selectivity

.. code-block:: sql

    ;plan detail
    SELECT /*+ recompile */ * FROM t1 WHERE name = 'Park';

::

    Join graph nodes:
    node[0]: dba.t1 dba.t1(6/1)
    Join graph terms:
    term[0]: [dba.t1].[name]='Park' (sel 0.5)
     
    Query plan:
     
    sscan
        class: t1 node[0]
        sargs: term[0]
        cost:  1 card 3

> **dba.t1(6/1)** indicates that the total number of rows in the t1 table is 6 and the number of pages is 1. Since the selectivity of **[dba.t1].[name]='Park'**/ is 0.5, the expected number of rows is 3, which is calculated as **6 x 0.5**. **cost: 1 card 3**/ in the execution plan indicates that the cost is 1 and the expected number of rows is 3.

Author: ```suggestion
**dba.t1(6/1)** indicates that the total number of rows in the t1 table is 6 and the number of pages is 1. Since the selectivity of **[dba.t1].[name]='Park'**\ is 0.5, the expected number of rows is 3, which is calculated as **6 x 0.5**. **cost: 1 card 3**\ in the execution plan indicates that the cost is 1 and the expected number of rows is 3.
```

> **dba.t1(6/1)** indicates that the total number of rows in the t1 table is 6 and the number of pages is 1. Since the selectivity of **[dba.t1].[name]='Park'**\ is 0.5, the expected number of rows is 3, which is calculated as **6 x 0.5**. **cost: 1 card 3**\ in the execution plan indicates that the cost is 1 and the expected number of rows is 3.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**dba.t1(6/1)** indicates that the total number of rows in the t1 table is 6 and the number of pages is 1. Since the selectivity of **[dba.t1].[name]='Park'** is 0.5, the expected number of rows is 3, which is calculated as **6 x 0.5**. **cost: 1 card 3** in the execution plan indicates that the cost is 1 and the expected number of rows is 3.
```

Cost of index scan
--------------------

Index scan is performed by searching non-leaf nodes, leaf nodes, and heap areas. The index scan starts by searching non-leaf nodes including the root node to find the starting point of the leaf node. Then, it searches the leaf nodes, looks up the satisfying key, and scans the heap area with the **OID**. The following example shows how the index scan is performed.

.. code-block:: sql

    drop table if exists t2;
    create table t2 (col1 int, col2 int, col3 int, col4 int);
    insert into t2 select mod(rownum,20), mod(rownum,80), rownum, rownum from dual connect by level <= 4000;
    create index idx on t2(col1,col2,col3);
    update statistics on t2;
     
    ;plan detail
    select /*+ recompile */ count(*) from t2 where col1 = 1 and col3 = 1 and col4 = 1;

::

    Join graph terms:
    term[0]: [dba.t2].col4=1 (sel 0.00025)
    term[1]: [dba.t2].col3=1 (sel 0.0125)
    term[2]: [dba.t2].col1=1 (sel 0.05)

    Query plan:
     
    iscan
        class: t2 node[0]
        index: idx term[2]
        filtr: term[1]
        sargs: term[0]
        cost:  4 card 1

> You can check the predicates in the execution plan through the information in **Join graph terms**/. **index: idx term[2]**/ is the predicate for searching the non-leaf node during the index vertical scan. The **filtr: term[1]** predicate is for filtering the key in the leaf node during the index horizontal scan. When accessing the heap and filtering data, the **sargs: term[0]** predicate is used to filter.

Author: ```suggestion
You can check the predicates in the execution plan through the information in **Join graph terms**. **index: idx term[2]** is the predicate for searching the non-leaf node during the index vertical scan. The **filtr: term[1]** predicate is for filtering the key in the leaf node during the index horizontal scan. When accessing the heap and filtering data, the **sargs: term[0]** predicate is used to filter.
```

::

    ;info stats t2

::

     Attribute: col1 (integer)
        Number of Distinct Values: 20
        B+tree statistics:
            BTID: { 0 , 5760 }
            Cardinality: 4000 (20,4000,4000) , Total pages: 11 , Leaf pages: 9 , Height: 2

The cost of an index scan is calculated as follows:

    #. Cost of reading a page = predicted non-leaf node pages accessed + leaf node pages + heap pages
    #. CPU cost of a repeated routine = predicted number of leaf node keys accessed

> The number of pages in a non-leaf node is 1 because the index **Height**/ of the statistics is 2 and the number of pages to be read excluding the leaf node is **2 - 1**. The number of leaf node pages is obtained by multiplying **Leaf pages** by the selectivity of the predicate **index: idx term[2]** used to search the non-leaf node. Since it is **MAX(9 X 0.05, 1)**, the number of leaf node pages to be read is 1. The number of heap pages to be read is obtained by multiplying the total number of pages in the table by the selectivity of **index**/ and **filtr** conditions. Here, it is calculated as **MAX(9 X 0.05 X 0.0125,1)**, so it is calculated that 1 page must be read. Finally, the CPU cost is obtained by multiplying the selectivity of **index: idx term[2]** by the CPU weight from the total number of rows in the table. **If you calculate it as **MAX(4000 X 0.05 X 0.0025,1)**, you get 1, and if you add up all the results so far, you can see that the cost is 4. If you look at **cost: 4 card 1** in the execution plan, you can see that the cost is 4 and the expected number of rows is 1.

Author: ```suggestion
The number of pages in a non-leaf node is 1 because the index **Height** of the statistics is 2 and the number of pages to be read excluding the leaf node is **2 - 1**. The number of leaf node pages is obtained by multiplying **Leaf pages** by the selectivity of the predicate **index: idx term[2]** used to search the non-leaf node. Since it is **MAX(9 X 0.05, 1)**, the number of leaf node pages to be read is 1. The number of heap pages to be read is obtained by multiplying the total number of pages in the table by the selectivity of **index** and **filtr** conditions. Here, it is calculated as **MAX(9 X 0.05 X 0.0125,1)**, so it is calculated that 1 page must be read. Finally, the CPU cost is obtained by multiplying the selectivity of **index: idx term[2]** by the CPU weight from the total number of rows in the table. **If you calculate it as **MAX(4000 X 0.05 X 0.0025,1)**, you get 1, and if you add up all the results so far, you can see that the cost is 4. If you look at **cost: 4 card 1** in the execution plan, you can see that the cost is 4 and the expected number of rows is 1.
```

> cost of join

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Cost of join
```

-----------------------

The cost of a join is generated by calculating the cost of the preceding table and the cost of the succeeding table separately, and the cost is calculated according to the join method. The following example below shows how the cost is calculated in a nested loop join method.

.. code-block:: sql

    create index idx1 on t2(col4);
     
    --;plan detail
    select /*+ recompile */ count(*)
    from t1 a, t2 b
    where a.col4 = b.col4
    and b.col1 = 1
    and b.col3 = 1
    and a.col2 = 2;

::

    Query plan:
     
    idx-join (inner join)
        outer: sscan
                   class: a node[0]
                   sargs: term[3]
                   cost:  19 card 1000
        inner: iscan
                   class: b node[1]
                   index: idx1 term[0]
                   sargs: term[1] AND term[2]
                   cost:  2 card 3
        cost:  572 card 1

> The preceding table is *a*/ and the succeeding table is *b*. Since the execution of the succeeding table is repeated as many times as the number of rows of the preceding table due to the nature of the nested loop join, the cost of the succeeding table can be calculated by multiplying the variable cost of the *b* table by the expected number of rows of the *a* table. **CUBRID**/ internally manages fixed costs and variable costs separately, and this information cannot be displayed in the execution plan. The variable cost of the succeeding table is approximately *0.553*, and the cost of the succeeding table incurred during the join is 553 when calculated by *0.553 * 1000*, and the final cost is *572*/ when adding the cost of the preceding table *19*/.

Author: ```suggestion
The preceding table is *a* and the succeeding table is *b*. Since the execution of the succeeding table is repeated as many times as the number of rows of the preceding table due to the nature of the nested loop join, the cost of the succeeding table can be calculated by multiplying the variable cost of the *b* table by the expected number of rows of the *a* table. **CUBRID** internally manages fixed costs and variable costs separately, and this information cannot be displayed in the execution plan. The variable cost of the succeeding table is approximately *0.553*, and the cost of the succeeding table incurred during the join is 553 when calculated by *0.553 * 1000*, and the final cost is *572* when adding the cost of the preceding table *19*.
```

Expected number of rows
-----------------------------

The **expected number of rows**  is calculated by multiplying the **selectivity** by the **total number of data rows**.

::

    Number of expected rows = total rows of a table * selectivity

.. code-block:: sql

    ;plan detail
    SELECT /*+ recompile */ * FROM t1 WHERE name = 'Park';

::

    Join graph nodes:
    node[0]: dba.t1 dba.t1(6/1)
    Join graph terms:
    term[0]: [dba.t1].[name]='Park' (sel 0.5)
     
    Query plan:
     
    sscan
        class: t1 node[0]
        sargs: term[0]
        cost:  1 card 3

**dba.t1(6/1)** indicates that the total number of rows in the t1 table is 6 and the number of pages is 1. Since the selectivity of **[dba.t1].[name]='Park'** is 0.5, the expected number of rows is 3, which is calculated as **6 x 0.5**. **cost: 1 card 3** in the execution plan indicates that the cost is 1 and the expected number of rows is 3.

Cost of sequential scan
------------------------

When estimating costs, the optimizer considers two things:

>     #. Cost of reading a page

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    #. The cost of reading a page
```

>     #. CPU cost of repetitive routines

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    #. The CPU cost of repetitive routines
```

The following example shows how the cost of a sequential scan is calculated.

::

    Page cost = number of pages in table
    CPU cost = total number of rows in table X CPU weight

.. code-block:: sql

    drop table if exists t1;
    create table t1 (col1 int, col2 int, col3 int, col4 int);
    insert into t1 select mod(rownum,2), mod(rownum,4), rownum, rownum from dual connect by level <= 4000;
    update statistics on t1;
     
    ;plan detail
    select /*+ recompile */ count(*) from t1 where col2 = 2;

::

    Join graph nodes:
    node[0]: dba.t1 dba.t1(4000/9)
    Join graph terms:
    term[0]: [dba.t1].col2=2 (sel 0.25)
     
    Query plan:
     
    sscan
        class: t1 node[0]
        sargs: term[0]
        cost:  19 card 1000

> **node[0]: dba.t1 dba.t1(4000/9)** shows that the total number of rows in the t1 table is 4000 and the number of pages is 9. Therefore, the page cost is 9, which is the total number of pages in the t1 table. The CPU cost is the total number of rows in the table multiplied by the CPU weight, which is **4000 x 0.0025**, which is 10. Adding the two values gives 19, and from **cost: 19 card 1000**, we can see that the cost is 19 and the expected number of rows to be retrieved is 1000.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**node[0]: dba.t1 dba.t1(4000/9)** shows that the total number of rows in the t1 table is 4000 and the number of pages is 9. Therefore, the page cost is 9, which is the total number of pages in the t1 table. The CPU cost is the total number of rows in the table multiplied by the CPU weight, which is **4000 x 0.0025**, resulting in a cost of 10. Adding the two values gives 19, and from **cost: 19 card 1000**, we can see that the cost is 19 and the expected number of rows to be retrieved is 1000.
```

    term[0]: [dba.t2].col4=1 (sel 0.00025)
    term[1]: [dba.t2].col3=1 (sel 0.0125)
    term[2]: [dba.t2].col1=1 (sel 0.05)

    Query plan:
     
    iscan
        class: t2 node[0]
        index: idx term[2]
        filtr: term[1]
        sargs: term[0]
        cost:  4 card 1

You can check the predicates in the execution plan through the information in **Join graph terms**. **index: idx term[2]** is the predicate for searching the non-leaf node during the index vertical scan. The **filtr: term[1]** predicate is for filtering the key in the leaf node during the index horizontal scan. When accessing the heap and filtering data, the **sargs: term[0]** predicate is used to filter.

::

    ;info stats t2

::

     Attribute: col1 (integer)
        Number of Distinct Values: 20
        B+tree statistics:
            BTID: { 0 , 5760 }
            Cardinality: 4000 (20,4000,4000) , Total pages: 11 , Leaf pages: 9 , Height: 2

The cost of an index scan is calculated as follows:

    #. Cost of reading a page = predicted non-leaf node pages accessed + leaf node pages + heap pages
    #. CPU cost of a repeated routine = predicted number of leaf node keys accessed

> The number of pages in a non-leaf node is 1 because the index **Height** of the statistics is 2 and the number of pages to be read excluding the leaf node is **2 - 1**. The number of leaf node pages is obtained by multiplying **Leaf pages** by the selectivity of the predicate **index: idx term[2]** used to search the non-leaf node. Since it is **MAX(9 X 0.05, 1)**, the number of leaf node pages to be read is 1. The number of heap pages to be read is obtained by multiplying the total number of pages in the table by the selectivity of **index** and **filtr** conditions. Here, it is calculated as **MAX(9 X 0.05 X 0.0125,1)**, so it is calculated that 1 page must be read. Finally, the CPU cost is obtained by multiplying the selectivity of **index: idx term[2]** by the CPU weight from the total number of rows in the table. **If you calculate it as **MAX(4000 X 0.05 X 0.0025,1)**, you get 1, and if you add up all the results so far, you can see that the cost is 4. If you look at **cost: 4 card 1** in the execution plan, you can see that the cost is 4 and the expected number of rows is 1.

Reviewer 2: ...table. **If you calculate... -> ...table. If you calculate...
```suggestion
The number of pages in a non-leaf node is 1 because the index **Height** of the statistics is 2 and the number of pages to be read excluding the leaf node is **2 - 1**. The number of leaf node pages is obtained by multiplying **Leaf pages** by the selectivity of the predicate **index: idx term[2]** used to search the non-leaf node. Since it is **MAX(9 X 0.05, 1)**, the number of leaf node pages to be read is 1. The number of heap pages to be read is obtained by multiplying the total number of pages in the table by the selectivity of **index** and **filtr** conditions. Here, it is calculated as **MAX(9 X 0.05 X 0.0125, 1)**, so it is calculated that 1 page must be read. Finally, the CPU cost is obtained by multiplying the selectivity of **index: idx term[2]** by the CPU weight from the total number of rows in the table. If you calculate it as **MAX(4000 X 0.05 X 0.0025, 1)**, you get 1, and if you add up all the results so far, you can see that the cost is 4. If you look at **cost: 4 card 1** in the execution plan, you can see that the cost is 4 and the expected number of rows is 1.
```

.. _join-elimination-optimization:

Join transforming Optimization

> -----------------------------

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
------------------------------
```

In the join transforming optimization, there are three operations:

    #. Transforming **OUTER JOIN** to **INNER JOIN**
    #. Eliminating **INNER JOIN**
    #. Eliminating **LEFT OUTER JOIN**

To disable the join elimination optimization, use the **NO_ELIMINATE_JOIN** hint.

.. _transform-outer-inner:

Transforming **OUTER JOIN** to **INNER JOIN**
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**OUTER JOIN** has a predefined join order with the leading table and trailing table, which restricts join order optimization. For performance improvement, **CUBRID** converts **OUTER JOIN** to **INNER JOIN** if there is a predicate which is not nullable on the trailing table. A nullable predicate is excluded from this transformation and satisfy the following conditions:

    #. Predicates written in the **ON** clause.
    #. Using **NULL** transformation functions. This includes **COALESCE (), NVL (), NVL2 (), DECODE (), IF (), IFNULL (), CONCAT_WS ()**.
    #. **IS NULL ,CASE** statements are also not targets for **Predicate Push**.

The following example shows an optimization that transform **OUTER JOIN**/ to **INNER JOIN**/.

> .. code-block:: sql
>     --create table

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: sql

    --create table
```

    CREATE TABLE t1 (col1 int, col2 int);
    INSERT INTO t1 values (1,1),(2,2),(3,2);
     
    -- csql> ;plan simple
    SELECT /*+ recompile */ *
    FROM t1 a LEFT OUTER JOIN t1 b on a.col1 = b.col2
    WHERE b.col1 = 2;
    
::
    
    Query Plan:
      NESTED LOOPS (inner join)
        TABLE SCAN (a)
        TABLE SCAN (b)

> The following example shows that can not be transformed from **OUTER JOIN**/ to **INNER JOIN**/ because of the nullable predicate.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following example shows that can not be transformed from **OUTER JOIN** to **INNER JOIN** because of the nullable predicate.
```

> .. code-block:: sql
>     -- csql> ;plan simple

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: sql

    -- csql> ;plan simple
```

In the join transforming optimization, there are three operations:

    #. Transforming **OUTER JOIN** to **INNER JOIN**
    #. Eliminating **INNER JOIN**
    #. Eliminating **LEFT OUTER JOIN**

To disable the join elimination optimization, use the **NO_ELIMINATE_JOIN** hint.

.. _transform-outer-inner:

Transforming **OUTER JOIN** to **INNER JOIN**
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**OUTER JOIN** has a predefined join order with the leading table and trailing table, which restricts join order optimization. For performance improvement, **CUBRID** converts **OUTER JOIN** to **INNER JOIN** if there is a predicate which is not nullable on the trailing table. A nullable predicate is excluded from this transformation and satisfy the following conditions:

    #. Predicates written in the **ON** clause.
    #. Using **NULL** transformation functions. This includes **COALESCE (), NVL (), NVL2 (), DECODE (), IF (), IFNULL (), CONCAT_WS ()**.
    #. **IS NULL ,CASE** statements are also not targets for **Predicate Push**.

> The following example shows an optimization that transform **OUTER JOIN**/ to **INNER JOIN**/.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following example shows an optimization that transform **OUTER JOIN**\ to **INNER JOIN**\.
```

.. code-block:: sql

    --create table
    CREATE TABLE t1 (col1 int, col2 int);
    INSERT INTO t1 values (1,1),(2,2),(3,2);
     
    -- csql> ;plan simple
    SELECT /*+ recompile */ *
    FROM t1 a LEFT OUTER JOIN t1 b on a.col1 = b.col2
    WHERE b.col1 = 2;
    
::
    
    Query Plan:
      NESTED LOOPS (inner join)
        TABLE SCAN (a)
        TABLE SCAN (b)

> The following example shows that can not be transformed from **OUTER JOIN** to **INNER JOIN** because of the nullable predicate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example demonstrates that the transformation from **OUTER JOIN** to **INNER JOIN** is not possible due to the nullable predicate.
```

        FROM (SELECT gender, rownum FROM athlete WHERE rownum < 15) a
        WHERE gender = 'M';

When using **ROWNUM, LIMIT** or **GROUPBY_NUM(), INST_NUM(), ORDERBY_NUM()** in views as above, **View Merging** optimization cannot be performed. However, when **ROWNUM** is used for partial range processing, **View Merging** is performed even if **ROWNUM** exists. This is the case when the following two conditions are satisfied.

>     #. only predicates including **ROWNUM** in the **WHERE** 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    #. The **WHERE** clause includes only predicates involving **ROWNUM**
```

>     #. only one subquery in the **FROM**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    #. There is only one subquery in the **FROM** clause
```

When using **RANDOM(), DRANDOM(), SYS_GUID()** in views as above, **View Merging** optimization cannot be performed.

> If **View Merging** optimization cannot be performed, **CUBRID**/ optimizes the **SELECT-LIST** item of the subquery. The following example shows how the **SELECT-LIST** of the subquery is optimized.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If **View Merging** optimization cannot be performed, **CUBRID** optimizes the **SELECT-LIST** item of the subquery. The following example shows how the **SELECT-LIST** of the subquery is optimized.
```

        FROM (SELECT name, nation_code, code, count(*) cnt FROM athlete WHERE nation_code = 'KOR' GROUP BY name, nation_code ) a, record r
        WHERE a.code = r.athlete_code;

> The following example shows how **Predicate Push**/ works in a situation where there are multiple subqueries.

Author: ```suggestion
The following example shows how **Predicate Push** works in a situation where there are multiple subqueries.
```

When performing an **OUTER JOIN** and either the predicate to be pushed or the target for **Predicate Push** within the view uses a **NULL** transformation function, it's not a target for **Predicate Push**.

.. _subquery_unnest:

Subquery unnest
-------------------------

> **Subquery unnest** improves performance by converting the filtering method, which executes the subquery in the **WHERE** clause repeatedly, into a join method that guarantees the same result. Subqueries in the **WHERE** clause can have different characteristics depending on the operator. Subqueries with operators like IN or EXISTS, which can return multiple rows, are the main targets for optimization. CUBRID partially supports this optimization only for the IN operator.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Subquery unnest** improves performance by converting the filtering method, which executes the subquery in the **WHERE** clause repeatedly, into a join method that guarantees the same result. Subqueries in the **WHERE** clause can have different characteristics depending on the operator. Subqueries with operators like **IN** or **EXISTS**, which can return multiple rows, are the main targets for optimization. **CUBRID** partially supports this optimization only for the **IN** operator.
```
